The ocean is really, really
deep, deeper, in fact,
than most of us realize.
If you were to shave
off all of the land
from the tops of every continent
and island in the world
and fill up the ocean's
deepest points with that land,
then the entire earth
would be covered
in an ocean 2 miles deep.
Three fourths of our
planet is already
covered in water though,
and it goes a lot deeper
than just two miles.
Let's start with
a sense of scale.
This dot right here is the
size of an average human.
This slightly larger dot
is the size of an elephant.
And this is the size of the
largest ship ever built,
the Knock Nevis.
With that in mind, let's
start going under water
and see what we find out.
The first milestone
is at 40 meters
below the surface, which is
the maximum depth allowed
for recreational scuba diving.
A little further
down at 93 meters
is where the wreck of the
Lusitania was discovered,
which is interesting
because the Lusitania
itself is 240 meters
long, which means
that it sank in water
shallower than it is long.
So if the ship was standing
on its stern or bow,
it would be sticking
out of the water.
Just slightly deeper
than that at 100 meters
is where diving can become
seriously fatal if you're not
careful because of
decompression sickness.
But that didn't stop a man named
Herbert Nitsch to accomplish
the free diving world record
at a depth of 214 meters.
This guy swam down to this level
with just one single breath.
But a little further
down at 332 meters,
we have the scuba
diving world record
which was accomplished by
another man named Ahmed Gabr.
If he had swam down
another 111 meters then
he would have reached the height
of the Empire State Building
if it was submerged under water.
And a little further
than that at 500 meters
below the surface, we
arrive at the maximum dive
depth of Blue Whales, the
largest creatures on the planet
and also the limit of the
US Seawolf Class Nuclear
Submarine.
At 535 meters we can
witness the maximum dive
depth of Emperor Penguins.
And this is one we must bring
up the intensity of water
pressure.
At this level below the
surface, the water pressure
exerted on a person
or the penguins
would be roughly
equivalent to a polar bear
standing on a quarter.
So further down the
depths at 830 meters
would be the height of the Burj
Khalifa in Dubai, the tallest
building in the world.
Once we hit 1,000 meters
below the surface,
we begin to enter
the scary zone.
Light from the surface can no
longer reach beyond this point,
so the rest of
the ocean below is
shrouded in permanent darkness.
On top of that,
the water pressure
you would experience at this
point would be about the same
as if you were standing on the
surface of the planet Venus,
meaning that you would
die very quickly.
You would also meet the
Giant Squid at this sea level
if the water pressure
didn't already kill you.
At 1,280 meters we reach
the maximum depth dived to
by the Leatherback Sea Turtle.
And further down
at 1,828 meters we
would reach the deepest
part of the Grand Canyon
were it to be
underwater with us.
Down at 2,000 meters, we start
to encounter some of the more
terrifying sea creatures
like the ominously named
Black Dragonsih, a carnivorous
beast with a stomach that
doesn't allow light to
be emitted through it.
Meaning that since we are
in total darkness underwater
at this point, the only way
you would ever see this thing
is with a flashlight.
A little further
down at 2,250 meters
we would reach the
maximum depth dived to
by both Sperm Whales and the
very frightening Colossal
Squid.
Sperm Whales often have
sucker marks and scars
left on their bodies from
battles with the Colossal Squid
that likely take place at
these incredible depths.
The squids themselves can
grow to be 14 meters long
and weigh up to 750
kilograms with eyes
the size of a dinner plate
and razor-sharp sickles
in the middle of
their tentacles.
So yeah, good luck
with that down there.
Way further down
at 3,800 meters we
can find the wreck
of the RMS Titanic.
And a bit past that
at 4,000 meters,
we start to enter the
Abyssal Zone of the ocean.
Water pressure is at an
astonishing 11,000 pounds
per square inch down here.
And there are numerous
strange, almost
alien like creatures that
inhabit these depths,
such as the Fing Tooth,
Angler Fish, and Viper Fish.
Down at 4,267 meters
is the average depth
of the ocean where
you would normally
expect to hit the floor.
But there are parts of the ocean
that go significantly deeper
than even this.
At 4,791 meters rests the
wreckage of the battleship
Bismarck, sunk
during World War II.
And way down at 6,000
meters is the beginning
of the Hadal Zone, named after
the underworld Hades, itself.
The water pressure
down at these depths
can become 1,100 times
what you would experience
way back on top at
the surface, which
is roughly equal to an elephant
balancing on a postage stamp,
or a single person carrying
the weight of 50 Boeing 747
jumbo jets.
Down at these depths, you
would be crushed immediately
without any outside protection.
But life still exists down
here in various strange forms.
At 6,500 meters we
reach the maximum depth
that the DSV Alvin can
dive to, a popular research
submarine that helped
to discover the Titanic.
Way further down at 8,848 meters
below the surface and we have
arrived at the height of Mt.
Everest, were it to be upside
down and placed underwater.
And then way further past
even that at 10,898 meters,
we arrive at the depth reached
by James Cameron in 2012
during the Deep Sea
Challenger Mission.
The deepest point of the
ocean yet reached by humans
was back in 1960
though, when two men
named Don Walsh and
Jacques Piccard reached
a depth of 10,916 meters using
their [? Trieste ?] submarine.
It took them five hours to
descend through the ocean
to this depth.
And they only stayed
for 20 minutes
before a window cracked and
they began to resurface.
Just a bit further
down from there
at 10,972 meters and we've
reached the average flight
altitude of a
commercial airliner.
So if you've ever looked out
of a window while on a flight
and looked down to
the ground, that's
a very good sense
of how incredibly
deep down into the abyss
that we are currently at.
Finally, when we
hit 10,994 meters
we have hit the bottom
of the known ocean,
called the Challenger Deep,
right here on this map
just about 300 kilometers
southwest of Guam Island.
However, it is believed that
there are almost certainly
even deeper parts of the
ocean than this that just
haven't been discovered yet.
It wasn't until
1997 after all that
the Sirena Deep was discovered
with a depth of 10,732 meters,
making it the second deepest
known point in the ocean.
It is estimated that only
about 5% of the ocean's floor
has been accurately mapped,
leaving the other 95% to be
currently a mystery.
It may be only a matter of
time before an even deeper part
of our ocean is found.